The President:
Leaders of the world's largest economies will gather next week
in Pittsburgh for the
second time this year.
The first meeting of the G20
nations in April came at the
height of the global
financial crisis --
a crisis that required
unprecedented international
cooperation to jumpstart the
world's economies and help break
the downward spiral that
enveloped all our nations.
At next week's summit,
we'll have, in effect,
a five-month checkup to review
the steps each nation has taken
-- separately and together
-- to break the back of this
economic crisis.
And the good news is that we've
made real progress since the
last time we met -- here at
home and around the world.
In February, we
enacted a Recovery Act,
providing relief to Americans
who need it, preventing layoffs,
and putting Americans
back to work.
We've worked to unlock
frozen credit markets,
spurring lending to Americans
looking to buy homes or cars,
take out student loans, or
finance small businesses.
And we've challenged other
nations to join us not only to
spur global demand, but to
address the underlying problems
that caused such a deep global
recession in the first place.
Because of the steps taken by
our nations and all nations,
we can now say that we've
stopped our economic freefall.
But we also know that
stopping the bleeding isn't
nearly enough.
Our work is far from over.
We know we still have a lot to
do here at home to build an
economy that is producing good
jobs for all those who are
looking for work today.
And we know we still
have a lot to do,
in conjunction with the
nations around the world,
to strengthen the rules
governing financial markets and
ensure that we never again find
ourselves in the precarious
situation we found ourselves
in just one year ago.
As I told leaders of our
financial community in New York
City earlier this week, a
return to normalcy can't
breed complacency.
To protect our economy and people from another market
meltdown, our government needs to fundamentally reform the
rules governing financial
firms and markets to meet the
challenges of the 21st century.
We can't allow the thirst for
reckless schemes that produce
quick profits and fat executive
bonuses to override the security
of our entire financial system
and leave taxpayers on the hook
for cleaning up the mess.
And as the world's largest
economy, we must lead,
not just by word,
but by example,
understanding that
in the 21st century,
financial crises
know no borders.
All of us need to act more
responsibly on behalf of a
better economic future.
That's why, at next
week's G20 summit,
we'll discuss some of the steps
that are required to safeguard
our global financial system and
close gaps in regulation around
the world -- gaps that
permitted the kinds of reckless
risk-taking and irresponsibility that led to the crisis.
And that's why I've called on
Congress to put in place a
series of tough, common-sense
rules of the road that will
protect consumers from abuse,
let markets function fairly and
freely, and help prevent a
crisis like this from ever
happening again.
Central to these reforms
is a new Consumer Financial
Protection Agency.
Part of what led to this crisis
were not just decisions made on
Wall Street, but also
unsustainable mortgage loans
made across the country.
While many folks took on more
than they knew they could
afford, too often folks signed
contracts they didn't fully
understand offered by
lenders who didn't always
tell the truth.
That's why we need clear
rules, clearly enforced.
And that's what
this agency will do.
Consumers shouldn't have to
worry about loan contracts
written to confuse, hidden fees
attached to their mortgages,
and financial penalties -- whether through a credit card or
debit card -- that appear without a clear warning on
their statements.
And responsible lenders,
including community banks,
trying to do the right thing
shouldn't have to worry about
ruinous competition from
unregulated and unscrupulous competitors.
Not surprisingly, lobbyists for
big Wall Street banks are hard
at work trying to stop reforms
that would hold them accountable
and they want to keep
things just the way they are.
But we can't let politics as
usual triumph so business as
usual can reign.
We can't let the narrow interests of a few come before
the interests of all of us.
We can't forget how close
we came to the brink,
and perpetuate the broken system
and breakdown of responsibility
that made it possible.
In the weeks and months ahead,
we have an opportunity to build
on the work we've already done.
An opportunity to rebuild
our global economy stronger
than before.
An opportunity not only to
protect the American people and
America's economy, but to
promote sustained and balanced
growth and prosperity for
our nation and all nations.
And that's an opportunity
I am determined to seize.
So, thanks for listening
and thanks for watching,
and to our Jewish friends, who
are celebrating Rosh Hashanah,
have a happy and
healthy New Year.
Shanah Tovah.